add ajax formatter guide (#840)
tripal/tripal: docs/dev_guide/custom_field/ajax_custom_formatter.rst

AJAX Responsive Formatters
===========================

Some fields need to be responsive.  For example, a user might select an analysis or organism to display data from. Drupal developers often use AJAX to rebuild the page based on user input.

Drupal and AJAX
---------------

> Drupal has its special way of doing AJAX!  You should `read the documentation carefully! <https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/includes%21ajax.inc/group/ajax/7.x>`_ To Drupal, AJAX only makes sense as on forms, and field formatters **are not forms**.  Instead, they are `renderable arrays <https://www.drupal.org/docs/7/api/render-arrays/render-arrays-overview>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Drupal has its own special way of doing AJAX! This is important to ensure that changes are executed in the correct order. You should `read the documentation carefully! <https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/includes%21ajax.inc/group/ajax/7.x>`_  The Drupal AJAX API works best on forms, and field formatters **are not forms**.  Instead, they are `renderable arrays. <https://www.drupal.org/docs/7/api/render-arrays/render-arrays-overview>`_
```

Author: >This is important to ensure that changes are executed in the correct order. 

I dont actually understand what this sentence is saying...

Author: >  The Drupal AJAX API works best on forms

You imply that the Drupal way of handling AJAX is do-able on renderable arrays, but that its better on forms.  So, can we do it on renderable arrays *without forms* as this sentence implies?  I didn't think so, thats why we have to use a form instead.

Reviewer: Drupal AJAX does work outside of forms. See https://www.drupal.org/docs/7/api/javascript-api/simple-drupal-ajax-load-with-jquery-and-delivery-callback. Unfortunately I've never seen a way to make this other method work with renderable arrays and since form-based ajax is more common and better documented 🤷‍♀️

> This may seem obvious in hindsight: rather than accepting ``$form`` and ``&$form_state``, they accept ``&$element``, ``$entity_type``, ``$entity``, ``$langcode``, ``$items``, and ```$display``, where ``$element`` is the renderable array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, rather than accepting ``$form`` and ``&$form_state``, they accept ``&$element``, ``$entity_type``, ``$entity``, ``$langcode``, ``$items``, and ```$display``, where ``$element`` is the renderable array.
```

AJAX Responsive Formatters
===========================

Some fields need to be responsive.  For example, a user might select an analysis or organism to display data from. Drupal developers often use AJAX to rebuild the page based on user input.

Drupal and AJAX
---------------

Drupal has its own special way of doing AJAX! This is important to ensure that changes are executed in the correct order. You should `read the documentation carefully! <https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/includes%21ajax.inc/group/ajax/7.x>`_  The Drupal AJAX API works best on forms, and field formatters **are not forms**.  Instead, they are `renderable arrays. <https://www.drupal.org/docs/7/api/render-arrays/render-arrays-overview>`_
As such, rather than accepting ``$form`` and ``&$form_state``, they accept ``&$element``, ``$entity_type``, ``$entity``, ``$langcode``, ``$items``, and ```$display``, where ``$element`` is the renderable array.

> This means if you want to add an AJAX callback to a field formatter, you  need a **seperate form file** that gets added in using ``drupal_get_form()``.  If you do this, you can build the AJAX as Drupal expects it.

Reviewer 2: 'Separate form file' is a bit misleading I think. You need a separate form function, which should be defined in another file (usually the theme file)

Author: changing to `seperate form function`.
I'm not going to lie, i dont put my forms in `theme` i put them in `includes/thing_myform_does.form.inc`.  Is that poor practice?

    $selected = 0;

    // $form_state['values'] will be set if the form has been submitted via AJAX
    if (isset($form_state['values']['featuremap_select'])) {
      $selected = isset($form_state['values']['featuremap_select']);
    }

    // We need to provide a container for Dupal AJAX to replace.
    // Here we use a fieldset with a set ID which we can refer to below.
    $form['rendered_maps'] = [
      '#type' => 'fieldset',
      '#collapsible' => FALSE,
      '#prefix' => '<div id="examplemap-featuremap-organism-selector-wrapper">',
      '#suffix' => '</div>',
    ];

    // This is the element which will trigger AJAX.
    $form['rendered_maps']['featuremap_select'] = [
      '#type' => 'select',
      '#options' => $select,
      '#title' => 'Please select a map to view',
      '#default_value' => $selected,
      '#ajax' => [
        // Your Drupal AJAX callback
        // which simply returns the form element to be re-rendered.
        'callback' => 'examplemap_organism_featuremap_callback',
        // This should be the ID you set above on your container to be replaced.
        'wrapper' => 'examplemap-featuremap-organism-selector-wrapper',

>         'effect' => 'fade',

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this need a 'method'   => 'replace' too?

Author: No, thats optional (actually "replace" isn't a valid choice).  see: https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/includes%21ajax.inc/group/ajax/7.x

>#ajax['method']: The jQuery method to use to place the new HTML. Defaults to 'replaceWith'. May be: 'replaceWith', 'append', 'prepend', 'before', 'after', or 'html'. See the jQuery manipulators documentation for more information on these methods.

Reviewer 2: I see. How about setting ''replaceWith' then? It's optional, but it does indicate that there are other options available

Author: there are a lot of optional keys to pass there (effect, speed, event, prevent, method, progress).  I don't think we need to stub them all, especially in cases like this where the replaceWith effect is generally the desired effect.  I THINK we link to the ajax documentation in this guide, where a user can see them all.  If we don't, we definitely need to.

Reviewer 2: Ok, If the user has a linkto the ajax doc it should be fine I think.

Author: yep we do a few lines above, so i'm going to keep as-is (makes me wonder if i should remove the "effect" key actually)
Thanks!
```Drupal has its own special way of doing AJAX! This is important to ensure that changes are executed in the correct order. You should `read the documentation carefully! <https://api.drupal.org/api/drupal/includes%21ajax.inc/group/ajax/7.x>`_  The Drupal AJAX API works best on forms, and field formatters **are not forms**```

      ],
    ];

    // Check the AJAX submitted values...
    $chosen = 0;
    if (isset($form_state['values']['featuremap_select'])) {
      $chosen = $form_state['input']['featuremap_select'];
    }

    // If the user chose an option (triggered AJAX).
    if ($chosen != 0) {
      // Then change the form accordingly...
      // Notice that you react to the AJAX change in the form
      // not in the AJAX callback.
      $mini_form = tripal_example_map_genetic_map_overview_form([], $form_state, $chosen);

      $form['rendered_maps']['map'] = $mini_form;

      return $form;
    }

    return $form;
  }

  /**
   * The callback will return the part of the form you want to re-draw.
   */
  function examplemap_organism_featuremap_callback($form, &$form_state) {

    return $form['rendered_maps'];
  }

In the field formatter, we simply add this form and put the markup in the element:

.. code-block:: php

    /**
     * In our Our__field_formatter.inc
     */
    public function view(&$element, $entity_type, $entity, $langcode, $items, $display) {

      // Multiple maps for this organism, let user select.  Create a special form for that so we can have an AJAX select box

>       $select = $select + $select_add;

Reviewer 2: These are not defined, are they? $select should be an array key->values

Author: yeah, looks like that part of the code got cut out generalizing the example.  Thanks!

Author: the selectors get passed from the `load` of the base field, with some extra code to make it clean.  im going to replace it with this:

```php

      // Select choices would be loaded in the base field's load method.
      
      $select = $items[0]['select_choices'];

      $form = drupal_get_form('tripal_example_map_organism_featuremap_selector_form', $select);
```
